Instructions for C# on 4-Series and/or VC-4
Create a New Project
In your IDE of choice, simply create a new project of type “Class Library (.NET Framework)” and select 
version 4.7. 
Edit your project properties and set the debug type to “Portable”
Here is what that looks like in some of the popular development environments :
Microsoft Visual Studio 2019 (Windows)
JetBrains Rider (OS X and Windows)
1

Making your Projects work on 4-Series and VC-4
Add Crestron Package
We have created NuGet Packages to make creating projects for VC-4 and 4-Series easier than ever. Once 
you have created your solution and your project, simply right-click on the project, and select “ Manage 
NuGet Packages”
Warning: these packages create libraries compatible only with a 4-Series or VC-4. 
These projects will not run on a 3-Series Control System.
From there, browse for Crestron, and you’ll see three packages. Install the one you need:
• Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.Library
This package is required to create a C# Library to be used wit h SIMPL+ or a Crestron C# Program.
It will add references to all available Crestron SDK DLLs, and automatically create the CLZ on build.
• Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.ProgramLibrary
This package is required to create a C# Library that can be used with a Crestron C# Program. It will add 
references to all available Crestron SDK DLLs. This package will pull in 
Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.Library as a dependency.
• Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.Program
This package is required to create a Crestron C# Program.
It will add references to all available Crestron SDK DLLs , and automatically create the CPZ on build. This 
package will pull in Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.ProgramLibrary and Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.Library as 
dependencies.
Here is what those screens look like in some of the popular development environments:
Microsoft Visual Studio 2019 Windows 
JetBrains Rider (OS X and Windows)
2

Using the NuGet Packages
If you are upgrading your project from NuGet package v2.12.41, please first remove the old Crestron 
NuGet package(s) from your project(s), and also remove any project references to Crestron DLLs and 
SIMPLSharpPro.EXE. This is a one-time operation, only applicable when upgrading from version v2.12.41.
Notice About Upgrading from NuGet Package Version 2.12.4 1
Using Crestron SDK References in your Project
T o ensure that upgrading to newer versions of the Crestron NuGet packages in the future also updates all 
references to Crestron's SDK DLLs, we automatically add a reference to all available DLLs to a project as 
part of the NuGet package install. We found out that any references added manually (even to DLLs that are 
part of a package), are not being upgraded to newer versions when we upgrade. 
This will create a larger CPZ/CLZ, but will not affect runtime RAM utilization. If you want to reduce the CPZ/
CLZ size you can mark unused references as "do not copy." 
If you do delete a Crestron SDK Reference from the project, please do not manually add it back in (that will 
prevent it from being upgraded in the future), but rather uninstall / re-install all the Crestron NuGet 
packages, or upgrade to a newer version if available. This means that if you installed 
Crestron.SimplSharpPro.SDK.Program, you will have to also remove the 
Crestron.SimplSharpPro.SDK.ProgramLibrary and Crestron.SimplSharpPro.SDK.Library packages.
Upgrading Crestron SDK References in your Project
Each individual project will maintain a reference the exact version of the NuGet packages you last used. This 
will allow you to make a code change to an older project, without worrying about changes in the Crestron 
SDK. If you upgrade one project, other projects are not affected!
In a single solution, Crestron recommends that all projects / references are built against the same versions 
of the Crestron SDK, to avoid compatibility issues.
Upgrading the version of the packages could not be easier: simply go back to the NuGet Management 
screen, and select the top level package (i.e. if your project is a Crestron program, select 
Crestron.SimplSharp.SDK.Program, not ProgramLibrary or Library) and upgrade it to the version you’d like. 
This will automatically update any of the lower level packages it needs. The system will automatically update 
all references and required files to the correct version. Do this for all projects / dependencies in your 
solution
JetBrains Rider IDE
Debugging C# on 4-Series
Setting Up The Control System
Make sure your control system and Rider IDE have the exact same version of code. (Rebuild to be sure). 
After you’ve done a build, use SFTP , and upload the ZIP/CPZ File that the Post-Build step created to the 
control system. Log into the control system’s SSH console and type something like this. You can change the 
program number and port number to your liking.
MC4>PROGLOAD -P:1 -D
One of these two:
• MC4> DEBUGPROGRAM -P:1 -Port:50000 -IP:0.0.0.0 
(program will fully start, and you can attach at any later moment)
• MC4> DEBUGPROGRAM -P:1 -Port:50000 -IP:0.0.0.0 -S
(program will wait for you to attach the debugger, so you can debug the constructor(s))
MC4>PROGRESET -P:1
When you are done debugging, please follow these steps, before detaching from your processor :
MC4>STOPPROGRAM -P:1
MC4>DEBUGPROGRAM -P:1 -C
[Safe to detach your debugger]
MC4>PROGRESET -P:1
1
Attaching via Rider
In Rider, go to the “Run” menu, and select “Edit 
Configurations.” Click the “+” and select “Mono Remote.” Fill 
in a friendly name, the IP Address / Hostname of your control 
system, and the port you specified in the console command 
from section 1.
Click “OK.” 
Go to “Run” menu, and select “Debug.” A window will pop up 
that lets you select a profile. Pick the profile you just created.
2

Visual Studio 2017 / 2019 on Windows
Debugging C# on 4-Series
Prerequisites
In order to debug the 4-Series using Visual Studio 2017 / 2019 on Windows, you need to install a VS 
Extension called “VSMonoDebugger”
1
Setting Up The Control System
Make sure your control system and Visual Studio IDE have the exact same version of code. (Rebuild to be 
sure). After you’ve done a build, use SFTP , and upload the ZIP/CPZ File that the Post-Build step created to 
the control system. Log into the control system’s SSH console and type something like this. You can change 
the program number and port number to your liking.
MC4>PROGLOAD -P:1 -D
One of these two:
• MC4> DEBUGPROGRAM -P:1 -Port:50000 -IP:0.0.0.0 
(program will fully start, and you can attach at any later moment)
• MC4> DEBUGPROGRAM -P:1 -Port:50000 -IP:0.0.0.0 -S
(program will wait for you to attach the debugger, so you can debug the constructor(s))
MC4>PROGRESET -P:1
When you are done debugging, please follow these steps, before detaching from your processor :
MC4>STOPPROGRAM -P:1
MC4>DEBUGPROGRAM -P:1 -C
[Safe to detach your debugger]
MC4>PROGRESET -P:1
2
Attaching via VisualStudio 2017 / 2019
In Visual Studio, go to the “Extensions” Menu, and select 
“Mono,” followed by “Settings.” Fill in the Remote Host IP , and 
the Mono Debug Port. Click “Save.”
Once this is done, go to “Extensions,” “Mono,” and select 
“Attach to mono debugger.” This should allow you to debug 
your program.
3

Debugging on VC-4
Prerequisites
The same prerequisites as debugging for 4-Series apply here. Secondly, you’ll need shell access to the VC-4 
server to edit the debug configuration file.
1
Setting Up Debug Configuration File
Using your editor of choice, edit the file /opt/crestron/virtualcontrol/conf/debug.conf
Add a line at the bottom of the file with the RoomID (all caps), and the port number. Like so:
MYROOM,50000
Save the file. Now, simply stop, and start the room you’d like to debug. On VC-4, rooms in debug mode will 
start not-suspended, meaning they’ll fully start up. Attach using VS2017/2019 or Rider, the same way you do 
for 4-Series.
Be aware that your server’s firewall needs to allow connections on the port number; otherwise debugging 
won’t work.
When you are done debugging, please follow these steps, before detaching from your processor :
• Stop the room from the VC-4 UI
• Remove the entry from the debug.conf file
• Start the room from the VC-4 UI
2
